### Sur la nature des choses

[https://images.prismic.io/syntia/Zra2NEaF0TcGI1l\_\_SimpleWedding4Grid.jpg?auto=format,compress](https://images.prismic.io/syntia/Zra2NEaF0TcGI1l__SimpleWedding4Grid.jpg?auto=format,compress)

Hedoné, signifiant un « plaisir » qui révèle le caractère d'une personne.
Aristote l'a identifié comme un pathos qui se réfère aux « plaintes de l'âme »,
qui a trois fonctions principales : l'état d'esprit, la variation des émotions
et le motif ou l'influence sur celles-ci. La connaissance partagée nous a aidés
à découvrir le côté émotionnel et vulnérable de nous-mêmes et de nos proches. Ce
fut l'une des expériences les plus fortes du festival Hedoné, nous ouvrant à une
confiance totale et formant des liens plus forts et une croissance dans les
relations.

Il pratique l'hédonisme éthique, qui repose sur la conviction que le changement
transformateur, qu'il soit individuel ou sociétal, ne peut se produire qu'à
travers une participation personnelle en profondeur.

L'événement lui-même a eu lieu au château de Burgscheidungen, dont l'héritage
historique remonte au VIIIe siècle.

Le mouvement Hedoné partage une vision visant à développer un réseau mondial
d'individus et à créer des espaces libérés pour expérimenter et apprendre sur la
méditation et le bien-être, la positivité corporelle, le yoga et le mouvement
corporel, la thérapie par le son et la guérison, la danse et le travail de
contact, la pratique tantrique, l'ouverture à l'intimité, la pleine conscience,
et une célébration de la sensualité du corps humain.

Cela m'a ouvert un nouveau monde, sans place pour la peur, la honte ou le
jugement. La cérémonie de clôture et la voix de Pascale Caristo ont été le point
culminant de l'événement, nous renforçant avec son histoire, la vérité, la
confiance, le courage et l'amour.

Les artistes sonores sélectionnés ont transformé le château en un rêve, guidant
les invités vers l'illumination spirituelle et les meilleures expériences de
leur vie. Merci au maître du son TŌKI pour les meilleures fêtes dans le caveau,
déverrouillant une porte secrète vers un portail souterrain datant des temps
médiévaux.

L'ambiance de la célébration est inspirée par le poème « De Rerum Natura », une
ode à l'hédonisme éthique. La décoration et le code vestimentaire sont
influencés par le monde botanique - fleurs, plumes, coquillages, objets
réutilisables de la nature, tissu de couleur claire. La peinture corporelle et
le bio-paillettes, ainsi que la nudité, sont encouragés et célébrés. Hedoné
accueille des individus de toutes races, âges et genres pour explorer une
expression radicale sous le thème de la féminité divine.

Merci Max de m'avoir invité à Hedoné et d'avoir construit ce magnifique voyage
ensemble !

> Célébrer les joies et les plaisirs du corps, de l'esprit et de l'âme

#### The Senses and Mental Pictures

Bodies that strike the eyes, awaking sight.

From certain things flow odours evermore,

As cold from rivers, heat from sun, and spray

From waves of ocean, eater-out of walls

Around the coasts. Nor ever cease to flit

The varied voices, sounds athrough the air.

Then too there comes into the mouth at times

The wet of a salt taste, when by the sea

We roam about; and so, whene'er we watch

The wormword being mixed, its bitter stings.

To such degree from all things is each thing

Borne streamingly along, and sent about

To every region round; and Nature grants

Nor rest nor respite of the onward flow,

Since 'tis incessantly we feeling have,

And all the time are suffered to descry

And smell all things at hand, and hear them sound.

…

And so we see how wind affects our body,

As if one thing were beating on the same

And giving us the feel of its own body

Outside of us. Again, whene'er we thump

With finger-tip upon a stone, we touch

But the rock's surface and the outer hue,

Nor feel that hue by contact- rather feel

The very hardness deep within the rock.

_On the Nature of Things, book IV By Lucretius, Written 50 B.C.E, Translated by
William Ellery Leonard_

"Les poèmes suivants sont tirés de l'édition de Sylvia Plath, basée sur son
dernier manuscrit. Ils ont été restaurés par sa fille Frieda Hughes,
rétablissant sa sélection et son arrangement originaux."

#### The Rival

If the moon smiled, she would resemble you.

You leave the same impression

Of something beautiful, but annihilating

Both of you are great light borrowers.

Her O-mouth grieves at the world; yours is unaffected.

And your first gift is making stone out of everything.

I wake to a mausoleum; you are here,

Ticking your fingers on the marble table, looking for cigarettes,

And dying to say something unanswerable.

The moon, too, abases her subjects,

But in the daytime she is ridiculous.

Your dissatisfactions, on the other hand,

Arrive through the mailslot with loving regularity,

White and blank, expansive as carbon monoxide.

No day is safe from news of you,

Walking about in Africa maybe, but thinking of me.

#### Gulliver

Over your body the clouds go

High, high and icily

And a little flat, as if they

Floated on a glass that was invisible.

Unlike swans,

Having no reflections;

Unlike you

With no strings attached.

All cool, all blue. Unlike you-

You, there on your back,

Eyes to the sky.

The spider-men have caught you,

Winding and twining their petty fetters,

Their bribes-

So many silks.

…

That revolve in Crivelli, untouchable.

Let this eye be an eagle,

The shadow of his lip, an abyss.

#### The Night Dances (2)

These lamps, these planets

Falling like blessings, like flakes

Six-sided, white

On my eyes, my lips, my hair

Touching and melting.

Nowhere.

#### Morning Song

Love set you going like a fat gold watch.

The midwife slapped your footsoles, and your bald cry

Took its place among the elements.

Our voices echo, magnifying your arrival. New statue

In a drafty museum, your nakedness

Shadows our safety. We stand round blankly as walls.

I’m no more your mother

Than the cloud that distils a mirror to reflect its own slow

Effacement at the wind’s hand.

All night your moth-breath

Flickers among the flat pink roses. I wake to listen:

A far sea moves in my ear.

One cry, and I stumble from bed, cow-heavy and floral

In my Victorian nightgown.

Your mouth opens clean as cat’s. The window square

Whitens and shallows its dull stars. And now you try

Your handful of notes;

The clear vowels rise like balloons.
