---
description: "Icelandic future dimensions"
pubDate: "Nov 20, 2023"
heroImage: "https://images.prismic.io/syntia/8e9801db-00f6-4f27-a87c-1aafca357b20_20231119_155548.jpg?auto=compress,format"
author: "Syntia"
categories: "projects, environmental studies, sustainable design, sound studies"
subcategories: "upcycled fashion, circular economy, urban design, material design"
---

The exhibition Parallel Dimensions I / II brings together 25 leading
contemporary Icelandic artists and innovators to highlight a diversity of media
and materials. It is held at the Felleshus of the Nordic Embassies in Berlin and
is ongoing from 10.02.2022 till 01.31.2024.

Developing technology has changed the way artists work, presenting more
possibilities and diverse ways of exploring the creative space. A common thread
among the works on view is the experimentation with time, space, perception, and
material as well as a cross-disciplinary approach and an understanding of
structures and systems belonging to distant domains, says curator Ásdís Spanó.

We live in a time of wireless guides, abstract codes and mathematical models
that shape human’s interaction with the environment. How we perceive and define
our surroundings is partly influenced by the data which we come across- smart
devices, wireless internet and accessible technology.

The effects of speedy technological changes on the present are widely seen, and
questions about how technology can be used for increased prosperity and welfare
are constantly being discussed. We face global warming, fluctuating economic
systems and crowded cities where technology is meant to lead us towards better
solutions and a more eco-friendly lifestyle.

> “Our future is determined by the ability to innovate and generations who are
> not afraid pushing the boundaries, asking difficult questions and having a
> voice.”

## The Rare Metal Age

In the Rare Metal Age, Anna Diljá Sigurðardóttir collaborated with scientists
from the Royal Institute for Sea Research in the Netherlands, to show the urgent
subject of mining in the deep sea and the future resources. It explores the
challenges and complexities that lie ahead and allows us a closer look into the
natural elements that shape a significant share in our economy.

The seabed mining world map exhibits the exploration zones, areas of potential
economic interest and areas of nodule occurrences around the globe. These
nodules contain desirable metals and are found in deep seas that often sit on
top of delicate sediments. The demand for such metals has skyrocketed in
proportion to their increasing importance in our daily lives, the increasing
demand for green energy sources, and the declining availability of them on
land. These conditions have renewed the interest of large corporations
in deep-sea mining in areas that include territories outside of the jurisdiction
of states.

Disruption of the seabed by sea mining will damage ecosystems, disrupting
the natural process of carbon sequestration and thus leading to rising global
temperatures. The aim of this project is to shed light on this industry and
the importance of the ocean, for the well-being of the planet and humanity now
and in the future.

[https://player.vimeo.com/video/367232848?color=000000&title=0&byline=0&portrait=0](https://player.vimeo.com/video/367232848?color=000000&title=0&byline=0&portrait=0)

## The Plant Printer

THE PLANT PRINTER is a machine that acts and grows like a hanging plant.
Equipped with a thermal printer and a light sensor, it runs on electricity and
is controlled by light amount. Each day, a few centimeters of the generative
plant are slowly printed on the paper tape. The amount of light dictates how
many and how big the leaves on the plant grow. Between days, progress can be
seen on the printout, as the light changes with day and night. This inorganic
plant helps us understand time in longer intervals than minutes and hours, and
logs the progress of our lives at the same time. We can see life itself progress
on the paper tape, reminding us to pause for a bit and enjoy the moment.

Inorganic.Design is an online collection of artwork by Icelandic artist Halldór
Eldjárn. In his work he strives to combine mediums, by introducing technology
into the artistic process, using algorithms to generate artwork and creating
installations of machines that self-produce new artwork.
[https://hdor.is/](https://hdor.is/)

![](https://images.prismic.io/syntia/8e9801db-00f6-4f27-a87c-1aafca357b20_20231119_155548.jpg?auto=compress,format)

## Shape.Repeat

The project _SHAPE.REPEAT_ by Valdís Steinars initiates a discourse centered
around clothing fabrication techniques. In contrast to traditional practices
involving pattern cutting, this innovative approach involves shaping natural
liquid materials into two-dimensional forms. Addressing a major concern, the
fashion industry contributes to an annual textile waste of approximately 60
billion square meters. However, this approach obviates the generation of surplus
cuttings, allowing for precise material allocation.

Valdís Steinars underscores the significance of continual societal reevaluation.
This novel clothing production method profoundly challenges the status quo,
urging us to pause and reconsider prevailing manufacturing norms.
[https://valdissteinars.com/](https://valdissteinars.com/)

![](https://images.prismic.io/syntia/243375c4-70a9-4c38-8732-fc3b063bbdfc_IMG_20231119_153615.jpg?auto=compress,format)

## Skriða

_Skriða_, 2021, Gunnhildur Hauksdóttir

_Skriða_ consists of audio work and an installation. The work is based on data
from the Meteorological Office about the geological transformation that occurred
in December 2020 when a landslide fell from the mountain above the town of
Seyðisfjordur, pushing buildings out into the sea. This event had a huge impact
on the community and a permanent impact on the town’s appearance. This is one of
the biggest landslides to fall in Iceland.

The installation includes rocks that Gunnhildur retrieved from the wound which
the landslide left in the mountain. In the installation the rocks are suspended
in the air, hung in satin ribbons that form pendulums. They are surrounded
by recorded sounds of Borgar Ao's doubble bass.
[https://www.gunnhildur.this.is/skrida](https://www.gunnhildur.this.is/skrida)

![](https://images.prismic.io/syntia/604eee60-c995-4b69-b35d-8afaf5f8cc72_IMG_20231119_184057.jpg?auto=compress,format)

## Magnetic Harp / Segulharpa - Úlfur

The Segulharpa is an electromagnetic acoustic instrument, created by Úlfur
Hansson. Its unique sound comes from the merging of two worlds, the electronic
and the acoustic. The player can shift the vibrational patterns between harmonic
intervals, so each string is able to produce high or low pitched sounds,
depending on how hard the player presses a given key. The sensors are
illuminated with brilliant white lights, glowing brighter as the player presses
harder down on the surface. The vibrations are carried through the circular
harp, so that the strings have influence over each other, creating a kind of
eco-system where no two chords will share the exact same sound. It is also
possible to channel external audio through the instrument, generating lush
reverberant tones as the strings resonate with the input signal.
[https://ulfurhansson.com/Magnetic-Harp-Segulharpa](https://ulfurhansson.com/Magnetic-Harp-Segulharpa)
![](https://images.prismic.io/syntia/f66b70e0-b8d3-48dc-88fd-8306ff6cdc2f_IMG_20231119_153657.jpg?auto=compress,format)

# Uncontainable truth

María Dalberg’s film Uncontainable Truth (2021) investigates the fate of
Icelandic working women in the 16th-19th century. These women performed hard
labour. They walked kilometers over frozen landscapes to beat and scrub their
master’s clothes, cared for grazing animals in all weather conditions, and
performed other strenuous physical tasks. They belong to subaltern classes of
illiterate and landless people tied to the land.

Dulsmál are criminal cases in which a woman hides her pregnancy and the birth of
her child. The child either dies of exposure to the elements or negligence. Two
Icelandic laws were formalized in 16th-17th century. These laws say that every
woman that kills her child should get the death penalty, even if she claims to
have borne a lifeless child.

![]https://images.prismic.io/syntia/83311525-e7e1-431c-8eca-a272776807d0_UT%2Bmynd%2B22_00187399.jpg?auto=compress,format

Dalberg works with embodied history to channel the words of women that have been
lost. Dalberg’s film is taken from 5 testimonies of 16th-19th century women and
aims to give them back the voices that they were consistently denied, the film
brings their names to light through spoken stories recorded in old manuscripts
and other contemporary sources.
