---
description: "Autonomy and Automation- Parrot Intelligence"
pubDate: "Dec 8, 2023"
heroImage: "https://images.prismic.io/syntia/68919927-7544-4644-8cdb-14d5d992b35b_20231208_001301-COLLAGE.jpg?auto=compress,format"
author: "Syntia"
categories: "research, information access, archiving and documentation, artificial intelligence"
subcategories: "content curation, algorithmic curation, criticism in dialogue, criticism governance, digital skills"
---

The LAS Art Foundation presents the most extensive work of artist Lawrence Lek
to date on three floors of the Kranzler Eck complex in Berlin.

It takes the form of an open-world environment that merges physical and virtual
medium with a geographical tags, spatial sound and dystopic visual experiences,
that brings you back memories of your craziest car crash scene and allows
visitors to fix the cars engine through an interactive game.

Entering the exhibition, you encounter a nocturnal roadscape, frozen in time.
There has been a car crash. The general atmosphere is mysterious, heightened by
the sounds of rain, sirens, radio interference and piano motifs.

Sound, video and game design intersect to evoke the virtual world of NOX. Lek
has composed their interactions with an eye towards the specificity of each
medium, and worked with scenographer Celeste Burlina to ground them within the
exhibition’s physical installation and lighting design.

![](https://images.prismic.io/syntia/68919927-7544-4644-8cdb-14d5d992b35b_20231208_001301-COLLAGE.jpg?auto=compress,format)

They evoke the moody urban settings of film noir and piece together memories and
clues to make sense of the tumultuous world around them. Similarly, your own
role as a visitor entering NOX is to interpret fragments of communication
between its characters.

Your movement through the space generates a soundscape of ambient music, voice
notes and poetic passages that alternately address a “sponsor,” “customer” and
“trainee.”

Following a self-driving vehicle on an extraordinary journey emerging into a
rehabilitation programme, the exhibition deepens Lek’s focus on the psychology
of artificial intelligence.

NOX elaborates Lek’s exploration of a worldbuilding, a type of creative practice
usually kept in the domain of science-fiction authors, technology corporations
and video game developers — spectres of whom are all present within the
exhibition itself. The project began with the question, “How will companies deal
with misbehaving AI?”

> “I always try to ground my fiction in reality. I think that the more
> speculative the scenarios an author creates, the more they need to integrate
> details and nuances that can only come from close observation of how strange
> and unexpected the real world actually is.”— LAWRENCE LEK

Lek has been using the game development platform Unreal Engine to create virtual
environments, games and CGI films and videos since 2016. For NOX, he has
simulated the physical installation at Kranzler Eck and used CGI modelling to
develop it into Farsight’s training facility, which is seen in the videos and
training simulation.

## Lawrence Lek’s “Sinofuturist cinematic universe”

Artist Lawrence Lek’s car crash scenarios brings us profound questions about
life in the age of automation. Since 2016, these have taken the form of films,
games, installations and soundtracks that together build what he calls a
“Sinofuturist cinematic universe.”

Each work explores a different facet driven by the industrial expansion of the
fictional AI enterprise corporation with developing smart city infrastructure
and autonomous transportation.

Lek’s works delve into the desires and fears of human and nonhuman characters as
they navigate Farsight’s data-driven domain. We hear the innermost thoughts of
two sentient AIs — a surveillance camera and a self-driving car — as they
describe their existential crises to Guanyin, an AI therapy bot named after the
Buddhist goddess of compassion.

Throughout the programme, Guanyin and the cars maintain open communication with
patrons, charting progress as they work through sources of trauma and
malfunction in the hopes of restoring “excellence.”

NOX stands for Nonhuman Excellence. What is presented in Lawrence Lek's NOX as a
catalogue of therapeutic measures has concerned AI scientists since the term for
artificial intelligence has invented.

# Training AI: How does artificial intelligence learn?

In discussion with Prof Dr Wolfgang Wahlster (German Research Center for
Artificial Intelligence (DFKI)) emphasizes the importance of autonomous cars'
governance and the need to prioritize safety over cost-cuttings.

### Autonomous cars' safety and legal implications

"Communication channels between the cars is already employed today in some cars,
but it's a significant reason for the so-called communication. It can be used
not only for security and safety reasons but also to facilitate education
changes effortlessly and create a community to exchange the ideas. This helps
these cars find and establish more effective routes.

### Data Ethics and Collaboration

There are icons in the so-called data ethics condition, involving people from
ethics, theology, computer science, and lawyers to the interior industry. It was
highly appreciated by the European Union, as well as in the US. In summary it
emphasizes decision making that prioritize human well-being. The image of
humans, compared to the dimensions of cars or physical structures, is extremely
significant. So, that's the first axiom to consider.

### Ethical Decision-Making and Pre-Crash Avoidance

According to European values, individuals are encouraged to make their own
decisions. However, what if you have to navigate through a group of people? In
extreme cases, the decision could favor people with a Ph.D. degree. This may be
argued in a German court. Ideally, one should claim the decisions intuitive and
not premeditated. Giving rules or making decisions should involve consultation
with others. Another aspect not implemented in these cars is pre-crash
avoidance. This has now became a standard in briefings. Even if a collision
cannot be avoided, there are strategies to minimize harm. For instance, slowing
down in a way that minimizes impact when colliding with no one else on the road.

There are numerous ethical rules included in these systems, aligning with the
regulations for autonomous cars in Europe. This is inherent and cannot be
changed, much like genes. This is crucial, although sometimes things can go
wrong. For example, in the US, a school bus driver tried to avoid hitting a deer
on another road. The decision led to some children being heavily damaged,
highlighting the complexity and challenges.

![](https://images.prismic.io/syntia/1f54050f-6fdb-4d17-9af1-6a61677f8c66_20231208_001526-COLLAGE.jpg?auto=compress,format)

### MIT Studies and Social Behavior

MIT is extensively studying how people interpret and decide in various
situations. We have tested and developed systems for two years, treating each
car as an agent. This is unrelated to private driving; a private car is just a
passenger. However, cars can communicate, sense problems, and exchange messages.
For example, one car senses an oil spill and communicates with others to alert
them. This social behavior contributes to safer driving.

### Communication Between Cars and Social Behavior

In various situations, messages can be sent. Some cars already implement this
feature. For instance, one car warns another not to overtake because another car
is approaching from behind, not visible to the first car. This can prevent
accidents. Then we can extended this to motorbikers, who are more exposed to
problems. The data exchange between cars helps protect bikers from potential
dangers. Similarly, we considered scenarios where a human driver might face
health issues. The car should adapt and take control to ensure safety. Although
it's effective, the cost of implementing such features in every car is currently
high.

![](https://images.prismic.io/syntia/d2e82229-8a03-4534-a585-379e1f9cd086_20231208_001636-COLLAGE.jpg?auto=compress,format)

### Advanced Car Features

Now, let me present one of our developed cars with unique features, addressing
issues present in other cars. It's fully electric, with a motor in each wheel,
allowing it to change shape and climb stairs. It can also engage in
energy-sharing with other cars, enhancing efficiency. This cooperative behavior
is superior. To sense the environment, various sensors are used, including
lasers, radar, and video cameras. Each wheel can be controlled independently,
providing unprecedented flexibility. This car is not just an autonomous vehicle
but a mobility platform, a service platform, a communication platform, and a
security platform. It adapts to situations and provides additional light during
the night, enhancing safety.

### Machine Knowledge Acquisition

Learning is essential for survival and problem-solving. We extract information
not only from data but also from literature. The combination allows the system
to draw conclusions and generate new knowledge.

Supervised learning involves providing labeled data, while unsupervised learning
is more complex, relying on clustering. Self-supervised learning is a newer
concept where the system gets unlabeled data and learns from its failures,
optimizing itself. Reinforcement learning, resembling human learning, involves
rewarding correct actions and learning from mistakes.

However, it's crucial to note that as systems become more autonomous, they
encounter challenges, including overfitting and the need for explainability. We
aim for systems that assist and enhance human rationality rather than replace
it.

In conclusion, the journey of machine learning has brought significant
advancements, but there's a need for continuous improvement in trustworthiness
and explainability."

![](https://images.prismic.io/syntia/77729fe3-921f-4354-98ef-dda874849f9c_20231208_001335-COLLAGE.jpg?auto=compress,format)
