---
description: "Smile, you look prettier"
pubDate: "Dec 2, 2023"
heroImage: "https://images.prismic.io/syntia/6ad5d441-2854-4db8-a791-6199acc34df0_695692_1693392958107_2.jpg?auto=compress,format"
author: "Syntia"
categories: "research, crisis managament, continuous learning, online education"
subcategories: "inclusive workplace, hostile work environment, employee rights, leadership development, career path"
---

# Smile, you look prettier

When you see a person as an object, all morals go out the window. When a person
is seen as a human, it’s fearful for some. “They knew what they did was wrong.
But when she was an object there was no wrong. This showed me the importance of
boundaries.”

Marina Abramović was one of the first performance artists to become formally
accepted by the institutions of museums with major solo shows taking place
throughout Europe and the United States. She created some of the most important
early works in this practice, including Rhythm 0 (1974), in which she offered
herself as an object of experimentation for the audience.

The body has always been both her subject and medium. Through the risk to her
own personal limits in this work, and her acceptance of taking that risk as an
artist, Abramovic has explored collective action and responsibility.

Today Abramović has become one of the most influential performance artists in
history for her use of her own body as both the subject and the medium in
performances which test her physical and mental endurance, while also
emphasizing audience interaction.

Despite the online criticism directed at her by the media and press, it often
expresses the fear of the art which is not limited to paintings, but art made of
trust, vulnerability and connection. “There’s so many people who think that what
I’m doing is not art at all. If I read this, I will never even leave home.”

Marina Abramović’s shocking Rhythm 0 performance shows why we still cannot trust
people in power.

In 1974, Marina Abramović dared an audience to use objects including chains,
rose, lipstick and knives on her body - and their willingness to abuse her
revealed frightening truths about misogyny.

“The Rhythm 0” performance lasted six hours. At first, her audience was passive.
But, as time went on, they became violent. The photographs of the day show
predominantly men, using the objects to cut into her skin, rip her clothes,
stick a knife between her legs, and attach a piece of paper to her body that
read “VILE”.

While the photographs made me feel discomfort and anguish, seeing the vast table
hit even harder. It’s a monument not just to Abramović’s fearlessness and
resilience, the way she tested her mental and physical pain thresholds to
extremes, but also to her trust in the audience. A number of her other
performance pieces have been recreated with younger artists, but Rhythm 0 has
not. I doubt it would be allowed, which leads to the question – can we still not
trust people when they are placed in a position of power?

One of the comments on the retrospective says: “I've been studying about
gaslighting and psychological abuse, and I find that this piece describes
exactly what is the risk of not learning to say "no", when you are too empathic
or sensitive.”

And what about the psychological abuse, bullying, and gaslighting in the
workplace? How often women and men are willing to show the truth about the
physical aggression, sexual harassment and psychological abuse?

One of the most common forms of violence at work is sexual harassment and what
is worrying is that between 74% and 75% of women with vocational training or
those who occupy senior leadership positions have experienced it at some time in
their lives according to a study carried out in 2014 by the European Union
Agency for Fundamental Rights (FRA).

It adds that work environments and exposure to situations where there is a high
risk of aggression are among the reasons for this, as well as the lack of
awareness among professional women of what is considered sexual harassment.

[https://data.europa.eu/euodp/es/data/dataset/violence-against-women-survey/resource/8b72e61d-05c1-4c49-98a8-b92fe4fb147e](https://data.europa.eu/euodp/es/data/dataset/violence-against-women-survey/resource/8b72e61d-05c1-4c49-98a8-b92fe4fb147e)

An example of forms of sexual harassment is caused by hostile work environments,
where the treatment of the victim can be intimidating and humiliating. The World
Health Organization (WHO), for its part, defines violence and harassment at work
as “those incidents in which the person is subjected to abuse, threats or
attacks in circumstances related to their work with the implication that their
safety, well-being or health is explicitly or implicitly threatened.

Mobbing is often characterized by systematic harassment by damaging the
reputation of the victim, isolating and objectifying people, making them
unproductive with work that isn’t related to responsibilities or imposing
impossible deadlines.

Therefore, provokation, threats, insulting, shouting, degrading or obscene
comments, defamations, professional discrediting, not letting the victim speak,
imitating the way they walk or talk, causing damage to their belongings,
minimizing their efforts and the excessive control of their working hours are
only a handful of examples of a huge amount of actions that constitute
harassment and workplace violence.

A certain kind of violence can be found inside the workplace, one that is
characterized by being non perceived: “micromachismos”. For the Argentine
psychologist Luis Bonino – who coined this term at the beginning of the 90s –
they are “attitudes of mild domination or very low intensity. They are,
specifically, clever forms of control, subtle or insidious, repetitive and
almost invisible behaviors that men are always perpetrating”. Clear examples are
the phrases, “Smile, you look prettier”, or “Women should stay at home”. When a
company opts for male candidates for a particular position or when in a meeting
the woman’s proposal is ignored in favor of her male peer who suggests the same
thing, these are all common examples of the prevailing “micromachismos” in the
workplace. It is a form of discrimination against women.

However, the consequences of these abuses often leave indelible scars on the
victims and cause strong deterioration in mental and physical health, requiring
therapy and rehabilitation specialists. Anxiety, depression, panic attacks,
sleep disorders, headaches, cognitive disorders related to attention and memory,
feelings of vulnerability and difficulties in establishing relationships, among
others, impact negatively on work performance.

It is necessary that companies carry out initiatives to raise awareness among
employees about the reality of violence and harassment against women and men in
the workplace, so that they know how to recognise it, prevent it, act in case it
is necessary, and encourage their peers to report assaults.

In this year organizations as World Health Organization (WHO), UN Women, United
Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), and the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) launched the online platform raising awareness in policies and programmes
to prevent and respond to violence against women with a public health, gender
equality and human rights priority. Their policies for call of an action for
policy makes are implemented by factors: Know the facts Assess risk and
protective factors Implement strategies to prevent violence against women Assess
evidence for interventions Develop a theory of change Apply the guiding
principles for prevention Strengthen enabling environment for prevention Adapt
and scale-up what works Monitor, evaluate and measure progress Commit to action

If you are experiencing harassment at your workplace, the question you need to
consider is, “where do I need to be in my professional development when it will
no longer be tolerated this way?”

Source of information in this article:

[https://www.who.int/tools/occupational-hazards-in-health-sector/violence-harassment](https://www.who.int/tools/occupational-hazards-in-health-sector/violence-harassment)

[https://www.who.int/news/item/17-07-2023-who-addresses-violence-against-women-as-a-gender-equality-and-health-priority](https://www.who.int/news/item/17-07-2023-who-addresses-violence-against-women-as-a-gender-equality-and-health-priority)

[https://www.dianova.org/news/a-silent-colleague-violence-against-women-in-the-workplace/](https://www.dianova.org/news/a-silent-colleague-violence-against-women-in-the-workplace/)

[https://www.mpdl.org/noticias/global/derechos-humanos/quieres-saber-es-micromachismo-entrevista-luis-bonino#sthash.lVgYo5nS.dpbs](https://www.mpdl.org/noticias/global/derechos-humanos/quieres-saber-es-micromachismo-entrevista-luis-bonino#sthash.lVgYo5nS.dpbs)

[https://medium.com/@melanie-ho/an-unpleasant-but-important-topic-30011a777b8f](https://medium.com/@melanie-ho/an-unpleasant-but-important-topic-30011a777b8f)

[https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2023/sep/25/marina-abramovics-shocking-rhythm-0-performance-shows-why-we-still-cannot-trust-people-in-power](https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2023/sep/25/marina-abramovics-shocking-rhythm-0-performance-shows-why-we-still-cannot-trust-people-in-power)

[https://blogs.uoregon.edu/marinaabramovic/2015/03/16/the-artistic-influence-of-abramovic-the-grandmother-of-performance-art/](https://blogs.uoregon.edu/marinaabramovic/2015/03/16/the-artistic-influence-of-abramovic-the-grandmother-of-performance-art/)
