# Autobiographies for the New Year

![](https://images.prismic.io/syntia/a0c147e5-2142-4388-915a-b400ff2f61a4_collage-rounded.jpg?auto=compress,format)

Benjamin Labautut's When We Cease to Understand the World electrified a global
readership. Throughout the selection of non-fiction novels I found myself in the
history of the science and technology tyrannical forces that keeps confronting
us with the deepest questions about the truths in human nature.

In Maniac, Labatut as created a tour de force on greater scale. It begins with
Paul Ehrenfest- an Austrian physicist and friend of Einstein's and places the
Neumann at the center of a literary triptych. A prodigy whose gifts terrified
the people around him, John van Neumann transformed every field he touched,
inventing game theory and the first programmable computer, and pioneering AI,
digital life, and cellular automata.

The industry-defining breakthroughs in design and tech lead the conquer the
gaming world. In DOOM guy: Life in First Person, John Romero reveals his
personal breakthroughs and vulnerabilities, difficult childhood and storied
career. After a years in a gaming spotlight Romero is now shedding the light on
the development of his games and business partnerships that made DOOM and Quake
cultural phenomena and lead him, ultimately, to be called DOOM guy and a video
game legend.

Besides the DOOM, how do we find the courage to rebel against forces ranged
against the Earth? Book Poetry Rebellion by Paul Evans embodies a galvanizing
collection of poems spanning 4000 years of human history. This book is not just
a sanctuary in which to find solace from environmental grief but a manual for
psychic resistance in the war against Nature.

"Literature is pathetic." So claims Eileen Myles in their provocative and robust
introduction to Pathetic Literature, all exploring the so-called "pathetic" or
awkwardly felt moments and revelations around which lives are both built and
undone. Myles first reclaimed the word for a seminar they taught at the
University of California San Diego in the early 2000s, rescuing it from the
derision into which it had slipped and restoring its original meaning of
inspiring emotion or feeling, from the Ancient Greek rhetorical method pathos.
Their identification of "pathetic" as ripe for reinvention forms the need for
this anthology, which includes 106 contributors, encompassing canonical global
stars and extraordinary writers.

### Destined to Doom

Now we had time and resources to breathe, think and dream. At one of the first
meetings, someone asked about a possible title for the game. Carmack said he had
the perfect name.

"I was watching the movie The Color of Money", he told us.

We were all familiar with it. It's the one starring Tom Cruise as a pool
hustler.

"There's a scene where Cruise walks into a pool hall with his cue case and hands
over some money to challenge another guy. So, the guy looks at Cruise and says,
'What you got in there?'"

The camera then pans up to Cruise, who has a confident, ear-to-ear smile,
Carmack had the same smile on his face. "And Cruise looks at him, smiles, and
says 'In here? Doom.'"

Technology should enable, serve, and inspire design, and vice versa. So ideally,
when a game designer talks about their vision, the technical architecture should
begin to formulate in the brain of the engine architect. Technical specs must be
mapped not only to optimize the look, speed, and efficiency of the engine but to
deliver the best gameplay, too. When there is planning, discussion and dialogue,
engine architecture evolves with the demands of a game, but development can work
the other way too, because an engine creates new gameplay opportunities.

My point is that while the DOOM engine was unquestionably a phenomenal
achievement, Carmack didn't just say "Here, use this." DOOM was a collaborative
effort. As the possibility space for gameplay began to take shape after the
first few meetings, I wanted to make sure everyone realized the opportunity we
had. We had all seen Carmack do the undoable multiple times, so it was time to
think big. Really big. I wanted each one of us to do the undoable. I delivered
an impromptu mission statement for the project:

"We need to make this game the best thing we can imagine playing. We have to
think of all the amazing things we've never been able to do and put them in this
game."

Over the Christmas break, while the rest of us headed home to visit our
families, Carmack stayed in Wisconsin. He was expecting a package,
cash-on-delivery: an impressive workstation, the NeXTstation by Steve Job's new
company, NeXT Computer. The machine used the incredible NeXTSTEP operating
system, which was light-years ahead of MS-DOS. It was the future. Carmack
ordered one and needed to get an $11,000 cashier's check for the delivery guy,
but with his MG left for dead in Shreveport and all of us out of the town, he
trudged to the bank on foot, cursing the snow, ice, and freezing temperatures
the whole way.

Destined to Doom, Doom Guy: Life in First Person (p156), John Romero.

One afternoon in the 1840s, as George Boole walked across a field near
Doncaster, a thought flashed into his head that he believed was a religious
vision. Boole suddenly saw how you could use mathematics to unlock the
mysterious processes of human thought. The same symbols that were used in
algebra could be used to describe what went on inside people's heads as they
followed a train of thought, expressing all the twists and turns in simple
binary form. If this, then that. If that, then not this. And in 1854, Boole
wrote a book that caused a sensation. It was called An Investigation of the Laws
of Thought. Its aim, "to investigate the fundamental laws of those operations of
the mind, by which reasoning is performed"... Boole was driven by an almost
messianic belief that he had been allowed a glimpse, by God, into the truth of
the human mind. But there were those who doubted this; the philosopher Bertrand
Russell was astonished by the brilliance of Boole's mathematics, but he didn't
believe what Boole had discovered was anything to do with human thought. Human
beings, Russel said, do not think like that. What Boole was really doing was
something else...

Adam Kurtis, Can't Get You Out of My Head

### The Limits of Logic

I often wonder if my horrific inferiority complex, which not even the Nobel
Prize has diminished in the slightest, is a product of having known von Neumann
for the better part of my life. Growing up he was not shy, introverted, or ill
at ease in his own body, and in that sense he was unlike any other genius I ever
met, but as a child the most unusual things confounded him, things that would
never bother a normal boy: he confessed that he could not understand how he had
learned to ride a bicycle- a veritable feat of balance, equilibrium, and
coordinated motor function- without once having had to use his reason. How could
his body think by itself? How could it figure out the complicated motions that
it had to execute so as not to fall flat on his face? These simple activities,
in which you actually had to stop thinking to fully accomplish them, would
fascinate him for his entire life, and even though he loved sports when he was a
boy, he avoided all forms of physical exertion when he became a man. Klari took
him on a skiing trip once. She had been a champion figure skater in her youth in
Budapest and moved about with such grace that Jancsi looked like a tiny
chauffeur or a bellboy following her around. He said yes to the invitation and
went along tamely enough, but after going down the first run he threatened
divorce and spent the rest of that weekend getting drunk and working out some
fantastic scheme to heat the planet's weather and ensure a tropical climate all
over the world.

Although I would later devote my entire life to physics, in school I was an
aspiring mathematician, so I knew just barely enough to intuit Jancsi's
unbelievable talent: he explained set of theory to me- the basis if modern
mathematics- in such a simple and clever way that I still find it hard to
believe that he could have had such a profound understanding before he had even
began to shave. Jancsi was trying to make sense of the world. He was searching
for the absolute truth, and he really believed that he would find a mathematical
basis for reality, a land free from contradictions and paradoxes. To do so, he
was determined to such understanding out of everything. He read voraciously and
studied day and night. I once saw him take two books to the toilet, for fear
that he might finish the first one before he was done.

### Being Close to Data

You can't see the forest, the pandemic

for the trees, our everyday lives

and thank god for that as it is as it is

I'm never in the mood for a pandemic

to take up residence in my brain

it is not in me to take up thinking

of people as nothing but numbers

to be counted for the story to grow ever

more and more awful and for the public story

to be gotten under whose control

If this were a data love poem

I'd be tearing out my hair and ranting

against just who thinks they can take this

from us with so little visible at our peril

without our permission as if in this case

now is not sufficiently present and we

who are here now will acquiesce in silence

Being Close to Data, Dara Barrois/Dixon, Poetry Rebellion: Poems and Prose to
Rewild the Spirit, Book by Paul Evans

When a cancer spread to his brain and began to destroy his mind, he was
sequestered by the United States military and confined to the Walter Reed Army
Medical Center. Two armed guards stood outside his door. No one was allowed to
see him without express permission from the Pentagon. An Air Force colonel and
eight airmen with top secret clearance were assigned to assist him full-time,
even though there were days he could do nothing but rage like a madman. He was a
fifty-three-year-old Jewish mathematician who had emigrated from Hungary to
America in 1937, and yet at his bedside, hanging on his every word, sat Rear
Admiral Lewis Strauss, Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission; the Secretary
of Defense; the Deputy Secretary of Defense; the Secretaries of Air, Army and
Navy; and the military Chiefs of Staff- all waiting for a final spark, one more
idea from the individual who had birthed the modern computer, laid down the
mathematical foundations of quantum mechanics, written the equations for the
implosion of the atomic bomb, fathered the Theory of Games and Economic
Behavior, heralded the arrival of digital life, self-reproducing machines,
artificial intelligence, and the technological singularity, and promised them
godlike control over the Earth's climate, now wasting away before their eyes,
screaming in agony, lost in delirium, dying, just like any other man. His name
was Neumann János Lajos.

![](https://images.prismic.io/syntia/e25b2b5b-5444-478b-bfe8-856d529b601e_44c617ea-a2f9-4f28-9222-2abc84832002_w1024_r1.778_fpx22_fpy53.webp?auto=compress,format)
Computer pioneer Neumann at a computer in Princeton around 1952. Photo: Alan
Richards / Shelby White and Leon Levy Archives Center / IAS

### Paul or The Discovery of the Irrational

![](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/0/0a/Einstein2.jpg) In photo-
Einstein at the home of Leiden physics professor Paul Ehrenfest, June 1920.
Photo by Paul Ehrenfest's (1880-1933) associate.

In July, as the light of the summer started to brighten the skies above his home
in Leiden, Paul's dark mood lifted enough for him to outline the beginning of a
new investigation with Hendrik Casimir on one of the great unsolved mysteries of
classical physics: turbulence, that sudden phenomenon by which any smooth
flowing liquid breaks down into a wild chaos of eddies within eddies, racing in
so many reactions at the same time that their moment cannot be predicted by any
known model. Turbulence is ubiquitous in nature.

Just like other such things, Nelly explained, that surpass proportion and cannot
be likened to any other. They obey no measure and refuse categorization, because
they exist outside the order that compasses all phenomena. These outliers, these
singularities, these monstrosities, will not be governed or compared by means of
a number, because they lie at the root of what is disharmonious, chaotic, and
unruly about the world. For the Greeks, she explained, the discovery of the
irrational was a heinous crime, an act of unforgivable impiety, and the
divulgence of that knowledge, an offense punishable by death. Nelly spoke of the
two surviving accounts of the Pythagorean sage who defined this fundamental
commandment: in one version, the man who discovered the irrational was banished
from his community, and his friends erected a tomb for him, as thought he were
already dead; in the other, he was drowned at sea by members of his own family,
or perhaps by the gods of themselves dressed as his wife and his two children.
If you discovered something disharmonious in nature, Nelly explained, something
that negates the natural order entirely, you should never speak of it, not even
to yourself, but instead do everything within your means to remove from your
thoughts, purge your memory, watch your speech, and even stand guard against
your own dreams, lest the wrath of the gods fall upon you.

Paul became convinced that he was somehow related to the Pythagorean sage and he
began to seeing disharmony and turbulence everywhere. He could no longer
distinguish any type of reasonable order to the universe, no natural laws, no
repeating patterns, just a vast, sprawling world without a measure, riddled with
chaos, infected by nonsense, and lacking any sort of a meaningful intelligence
behind it; he could perceive the rise of the irrational in the mindless chants
of the Hitler Youth spewing over the radio waves, in the rants of warmongering
politicians, and in the blind proponents of endless progress, but he could also
distinguish it, ever more clearly, in the papers and lectures of his colleagues,
brimming over with supposedly revolutionary ideas that he regarded as nothing
but the industrialization of physics. He wrote of his dismay to Einstein- whose
youngest son, Edouard, was schizophrenic and had been institutionalized on
several occasions, so Paul felt his friend was weighted down by part of his same
burdens- decrying in his letter what he saw as a dark, unconscious force that
was slowly creeping into the scientific worldview, one in which rationality had
become somehow confused for its very opposite: "Reason is now untethered from
all other deeper, more fundamental aspects of our psyche, and I'm afraid it will
lead us by the bit, like a drunken mule."

On the morning of the twenty-fifth of September 1933, the Austrian physicist
Paul Ehrenfest walked into Professor Jan Watering's Pedagogical Institute for
Afflicted Children in Amsterdam, shot his fifteen-year-old son, Vassily, in the
head, the turned the gun on himself. Paul died instantly, while Vassily, who
suffered from Down syndrome, was in agony for hours before being pronounced dead
by the same doctors who had cared for him since his arrival at the institute, in
January of that same year.

Book The Maniac by Benjamín Labatut

The characteristic of the snow-storm is its blackness. Nature's habitual aspect
during a storm- the earth or sea black and the sky pale- is reversed: the sky is
black, the ocean white; foam below, darkness above; an horizon walled in with
smoke, a zenith roofed with crape. The tempest resembles a cathedral hung with
mourning, but no light in that cathedral, - no phantom lights on the crests of
the waves, no spark, no phosphorescence, naught but a huge shadow. The Polar
cyclone differs from the Tropical cyclone, inasmuch as the one sets fire to
every light, and the other extinguishes them all. The world is suddenly
converted into the arched vault of a cave. Out of the night falls a dust of pale
spots, which hesitate between sky and sea. These spots, which are flakes of
snow, slip, wander and float. It is like the tears of a winding-sheet putting
themselves into life-like motion. A mad wind mingles with this dissemination.
Blackness crumbling into whiteness, the furious into the obscure, all the tumult
of which the sepulchre is capable, a whirlwind under a catafalque,- such is the
snow-storm. Underneath trembles the ocean, forming and reforming over portentous
unknown depths.

In the Polar wind, which is electrical, the flakes turn suddenly into
hailstones, and the air becomes filled with projectiles; the water crackles,
shot with grape.

No thunderstrokes; the lighting of boreal storms is silent. What is sometimes
said of the cat, "It swears", may be applied to this lightning. It is a menace
proceeding from a mouth half open, and strangely inexorable. The snow-storm is a
storm blind and dumb; when it has passed, the ships also are often blind and the
sailors dumb.

To escape from such an abyss is difficult.

Excerps from The Man Who Laughs, Victor Hugo. Pathetic Literature by Eileen
Myles

### The Silfra Fault, Iceland

If scuba diving often means hot water and coral reefs, there are exceptions that
extends of highly advanced dive and technical dive disciplines. That's exactly
what Iceland offers with the Silfra Fault, where the water stays near freezing
all year round at 2 degrees!

Located at the junction of the Eurasian and North American tectonic plates,
which are diverging from each other at about 2 centimeters per year, this fault
close to Reykjavik is recognized as one of the most beautiful cold-water dives
in the world. With its waters' crystalline clarity providing visibility of up to
100 meters, it offers divers and snorkelers the opportunity to lure between the
two mineral walls—an incomparable immersion, even though there is very little
marine life. It is the only place in the world where you can dive between two
tectonic plates and even touch them simultaneously with both hands!

#### IN PRACTICE

Anyone can be tempted, either on the surface for non-divers or with scuba diving
equipment. Diving facilities are available on-site. Remember to dress warmly
under the wetsuit.

100 spots de plongée à couper le souffle - Leydet, Anthony
