# Creation in reverse

https://images.prismic.io/syntia/ZsZq7UaF0TcGJM48_Sequence01.00_05_29_18.Still001.png?auto=format,compress

Emergence of developing good listening skills and making sense of our world and
perception involves the studies of how that acoustic environment gives us a
sense of place. It has become not only political, but substantial for any
business and cultural context to coexist.

After living for several years in Berlin I found that most of the people I’m
getting to work with are from industries directly or indirectly related to sound
studies. The performing arts and the sound direction are composed to navigate
the course in every creative production, marketing campaign or a film direction.

As a lead software engineer who developed skills in professional dance aside
from my career, I’m highly interested in starting a business within a framework
that would establish new and innovative ways of working and build up better
investment strategies in the process of creation.

In my research I’m looking from the perspective of social studies, communication
systems and networks that would lead to resourcing the right techniques for
marketplace establishment. I'm exploring different channels in order to find
better alternatives for the tools available for the creators and startups in
early stages of their business development.

I’m fascinated by David Byrne’s book “How Music Works” and his view and personal
story in sound making career. In this article you will find some of my takeaways
and impressions.

### Adapting the cultural context

The process of writing music doesn’t follow a strict path. For some composers,
music is created via notation, the written system of markings that some
percentage of musicians share as a common language. More recently, music began
to be created mechanically or digitally, by accretion and layering of sounds,
samples, notes, and bits dragged and thrown together either physically or in the
virtual world of a computer.

The same music played in a different context can not only change the way a
listener perceives that music, but it can also cause the music itself to take on
an entirely new meaning. 

In a sense, we work backward, either consciously or unconsciously, creating work
that fits the venue available to us. After a while the form of the work that
predominates in these spaces is taken for granted. To what extent sound artists
are writing music specifically, and maybe unconsciously, to fit these places?

Percussive music carries well outdoors, where people might be both dancing and
milling about. The music perfectly fits the place where it is heard, sonically
and structurally. It is absolutely ideally suited as a living thing.

It’s been pointed out by Scott Joplin and others that the origin of jazz solos
and improvisations was a pragmatic way of solving a problem that had emerged:
the “written” melody would run out while the musicians were playing, and in
order to keep a popular section continuing longer for the dancers who wanted to
keep moving, the players would jam over those chord changes while maintaining
the same groove. The musicians learned to stretch out and extend whatever
section of the tune was deemed popular. These improvisations and elongations
evolved out of necessity, and a new kind of music came into being.

Until amplification and microphones came into common use, the instruments
written for and played were adapted to fit the situation. The makeup of the
bands, as well as the parts the composers wrote, evolved to be heard. The
instruments were carefully fashioned, selected, tailored, and played to best
suit the physical, acoustic, and social situation.

### Where are the new music venues?

I started extensively listening to the radio when I got my first car. The car
interior was a perfect sound studio, where I would plan hour-long trips just to
get a chance of occupying the space with my vocals to fill in the vacuum. I
would visualize dance choreographies while driving to the dance theater, music
festivals and local cultural event venues.

Private listening really took off in 1979, with the popularity of the Walkman
portable cassette player. Listening to the music on a Walkman is a variation of
the “sitting very still in a concert hall” experience (there are no acoustic
distractions), combined with the virtual space (achieved by adding reverb and
echo to the vocals and instruments) that studio recording allows.

One would expect music that is essentially a soothing flood of ambient moods as
a way to relax and decompress, or maybe dense and complex compositions that
reward repeated playing and attentive listening, maybe intimate and rudely
erotic vocals that would be inappropriate to blast in public but that you could
enjoy privately. If any of this is happening, I am unaware of it.

### Recorded music

With the advent of recorded music in 1878, the nature of the places in which
music was heard changed. Music now had to serve two different needs
simultaneously. The phonograph boc in the parlor became a new venue; for many
people, it replaced the concert hall or the club.

By the thirties, most people were listening to music either on radio or on home
phonographs. People probably heard a greater quantity of music, and a greater
variety, on these devices than they would ever hear in person in their
lifetimes.

The performing musician was now expected to write and create for two very
different spaces: the live venue, and the device that could play a recording or
receive a transmission. Socially and acoustically, these spaces were worlds
apart. But the compositions were expected to be the same! An audience who heard
and loved a song on radio naturally wanted to hear the same song at the club or
the concert hall.

Performers adapted to this new technology. The microphones that recorded singers
changed the way they sang and the way their instruments were played. Singers no
longer had to have great lungs to be successful. Frank Sinatra and Bing Crosby
were pioneers when it came to singing “to the microphone”. They adjusted their
vocal dynamics in ways that would have been unheard of earlier. It might not
seem that radical now, but crooning was a new kind of singing back then. It
wouldn’t have worked without a microphone.

Chet Baker even sang in a whisper, as did Joao Gilberto, and millions followed.
To a listener, these guys are whispering like a lover, right into your ear,
getting completely inside your head. Music had never been experienced that way
before. Needless to say, without microphones this intimacy wouldn’t have been
heard at all.

Music written for contemporary discos, in my opinion, usually only works in
those social and physical spaces- it really works best on the incredible sound
systems that are often installed in those rooms. It’s for dancing, as was early
hip-hop, which emerged out of dance clubs in the same way jazz did- by extending
sections of the music so the dancers could show off and improvise. Once again
the dancers were changing the context, urging the music in new directions.

The gathered masses in sports arenas and stadiums demanded that the music
perform a different function- not only sonically but socially- from what it had
been asked to do on a record or in a club. The music those bands ended up
writing in response- arena rock- is written with that in mind: rousing, stately
anthems. To my ears it’s a soundtrack for a gathering, and listening to it in
other contexts re-creates the memory or anticipation of that gathering- a
stadium in your head.

### Musical adaptation

The adaptive aspect of creativity isn’t limited to musicians and composers or
artists in any other media. It extends into the natural world as well.

Musical evolution and adaptation is an interspecies phenomenon. And presumably,
as some claim, birds enjoy singing, even though they, like us, change their
tunes over time.

David Attenborough and others have claimed that birdcalls have evolved to fit
the environment. In dense jungle foliage, a constant, repetitive and brief
signal within a narrow frequency works best- the repetition is like an
error-correcting device. If the intended recipient didn’t get the first
transmission, an identical one will follow.

Birds that live on the forest floor evolved lower-pitched calls so they don’t
bounce or become distorted by the ground as higher-pitched sounds might. Water
birds have calls that, unsurprisingly, cut through the ambient sounds of water,
and birds that live in the plains and grasslands, like the Savannah Sparrow,
have buzzing calls that can traverse long distances.

It’s not just birds, either. In the waters around New Zealand, whale calls have
adapted to the increase in shipping noise over the last few decades- the hum of
engines and thrash of propellers. Whales need to signal over huge distances to
survive, and one hopes that they continue to adapt to this audio pollution.

This view of creation is somewhat reversed because of the practical adaptations.
It seems that creativity, whether birdsong, painting, or songwriting, is as
adaptive as anything else. The emergence of a remarkable and memorable work
seems to appear when it is perfectly suited to its context and emotionally
resonant.

### The biggest room of all

Bernie Krause, a pioneering electronic musician who now focuses mostly on
bio-acoustics, has made recordings all over the world in many natural
environments, and reveals how the calls of insects, birds, and mammals evolved
to fit unique spots in the audio spectrum.

Krause refers to this spectrum of calls as an orchestra- where each
animal/instrument plays a part in its own range, and together they make a
composition which changes depending on the time of day and season in its place.
Sadly, Krause’s recordings revealed another truth: even if a landscape looks
identical to the way it did a decade ago, acoustic analysis often reveals that a
critter that once filled a specific part of the audio spectrum has been erased
from the landscape. Most of the time it is due to the intrusion or intervention
from noise pollution- traffic, farms, houses, global warming. What’s interesting
is that it’s the acoustic analysis and missing sound, not some visual evidence
that makes this change clear.

### Architecture as an instrument

Scientists have proposed that pre-Columbian sites have acoustic properties.
Archeologist Francesca Zalaquett explained how Mayanpublic squares in the
ancient city of Palenque were designed so that someone speaking or singing from
a particular spot could be heard way across the square.

In Peru, at a sacred site named Chavin de Huantar that was established as 1200
BCE, there is an underground maze, the acoustics of which were designed to
disorient the visitor as much as the winding passages do.

Archeologist John Rick of Stanford University thinks the various kinds of rock
used in these tunnels, along with the multiple acoustic reflections from the
bending passageways, can make one’s voice sound as if it’s coming from “every
direction at once.” He believes that this labyrinth was used for spiritual
rituals, and, like a stage in contemporary theater, the acoustics would have
helped set the scene.

It seems the effect of architecture on music and sound can be reciprocal. Just
as acoustics in a space determine the evolution of music- acoustic properties-
particularly those that affect human voice- can guide the structure and form of
buildings.

“On a break from the tour, I went south to Bali. I rented a small motorcycle and
headed up into the hills, away from the beach resorts. I soon discovered that if
one saw offerings of flowers and fruit being brought to a village temple
compound in the afternoon, it would be pretty certain that some sort of ritual
performance would follow there at night.

Sure enough, night after night I would catch dances accompanied by gamelan
orchestras and shadow-puppet excerpts from the Hindu Ramayana- epic and
sometimes ritual performances that blended religious and theatrical elements. (A
gamelan is a small orchestra made up mainly of tuned metallic gongs and
xylophone-like instruments- the interplay between the parts is beautiful and
intricate.) It wasn’t all thrashing chaos, as a Westerner might expect, but a
deeper kind of dance.

I was struck by other seemingly peripheral aspects of these  performances. The
audiences, mostly local villagers of all ages, weren’t paying attention half of
the time. People would wander in and out, go get a snack from a cart or leave to
smoke a bidi cigarette, and then return to watch some more. This was more like
the behavior of audiences in music clubs than in Western theaters, where they
were expected to sit quietly and only leave or converse once the show was over.

These Balinese “shows” were completely integrated into people’s daily lives, or
so it seemed to me. There was no attempt to formally separate the ritual and the
show from the audience. The food, the music, and the dance were all just another
part of daily activity. I remembered a story about John Cage, who, when in
Japan, asked someone what their religion was. The reply was that they didn’t
have a strict religion- they danced. Japanese do, of course, have Buddhist and
Shinto rituals for weddings, funerals, and marriages, but a weekly thing like
going to the church or temple doesn’t exist. The “religion” is so integrated
into the culture that it appears in daily gestures and routines, unsegregated
from ordinary life. I was beginning to see that theatricality wasn’t necessarily
a bad thing. It was part of life in much of the world, and not necessarily phony
either.

I guess I was primed to receive this new way of looking at performance, but I
quickly absorbed that it was all right to make a show that didn’t pretend to be
“natural”. The Western emphasis on pseudo-naturalism and the cult of spontaneity
as a kind of authenticity was only one way of doing things onstage.”

### Auditioning

“At the beginning of the dance audition there were fifty dancers in the room. We
had two days to whittle them down to three. Cruel, but, well, fun too. We
decided that the dancers would be asked to do three types of things: exercises
in which they made up their own movement, short routines that they would be
asked to memorize, and bits where they would receive notes and suggestions for
how to improve what they’d just done. Noemie began with an exercise I’ve never
forgotten. It consisted of four simple rules:

1. Improvise moving to the music and come up with an eight-count phrase. (In
   dance, a phrase is a short series of moves that can be repeated.)

2. When you find a phrase you like, loop (repeat) it.

3. When you see someone else with a stronger phrase, copy it.

4. When everyone is doing the same phrase the exercise is over.

It was like watching evolution on fast-forward, or an emergent life form coming
into being. At first the room was chaos, writhing bodies everywhere. Then one
could see that folks had chosen their phrases, and almost immediately one could
see a pocket of dancers who had all adopted the same phrase. The copying had
begun already, albeit just in one area. This pocket of copying began to expand,
to go viral, while yet another one now emerged on the other side of the room.
One clump grew faster than the other, and within four minutes the whole room was
filled with dancers moving in perfect unison. Unbelievable! It only took four
minutes for this evolutionary process to kick in, and for the “strongest” to
dominate. It was one of the most amazing dance performances I’ve ever seen. Too
bad it was over so quickly, and that one did have to know the rules that had
been laid out to appreciate how much a simple algorithm could generate unity out
of chaos.

After this vigorous athletic experiment, the dancers rested while we compared
notes. I noticed a weird and quite loud windlike sound, rushing and pulsing. I
didn’t know what it was; it seemed to be coming from everywhere and nowhere. It
was like no sound I’d ever heard before. I realized it was the sound of fifty
people catching their breath in and out, in an enclosed room. It then gradually
faded away. For me it was part of the piece, too.”

Excerpts from David Byrne’s book, “How Music Works”.

There are lots of unacknowledged theater forms going on all around. Our lives
are filled with performances that have been so woven into our daily routine that
the artificial and performative aspect has slipped into invisibility. PowerPoint
presentations are a kind of a theater, a kind of augmented stand-up. Failing to
acknowledge that these are performances is to assume that anyone could and
should be able to do it. In political speeches- and I don’t think there’ll be
any argument that they are in fact performances- the hair, the clothes, and the
gestures are all carefully thought out.

There’s something special about the collective nature of an audience at a live
performance, the shared experience with other bodies in a room going through the
same at the time, that isn’t analogous to sound heard through headphones. Often
the assembly of fans defines an experience- it’s a social event, an affirmation
of a community and belonging to a larger tribe. All these live experiences are
ephemeral- nothing lingered, nothing remained except for your memory of what you
heard and felt.

### Listening modes

Sociologist H. Stith Bennett suggests that over time we developed what he calls
“recording consciousness,” which means we internalize how the world sounds based
on how recordings sound. He claims that the part of our brain that deals with
hearing acts as a filter and, based on having heard lots of recorded sound, we
simply don’t hear things that don’t fit that sonic template. This development
might have led us to listen to music more closely.

So the mind’s eye (and ear) is a truly variable thing. What one person hears and
sees is not necessarily what others perceive. Our brains can and often do narrow
the scope of what we perceive to the extent that things that happen right before
our eyes sometimes don’t register. Our own sensory organs, and thus even our
interpretations of data and our readings of measurements on instruments, are
wildly subjective.

Read more about Audio-Vision: Sound on screen methodology in this article:
[](https://syntia.org/en/projects/audio-vision-sound-on-screen/)
[https://syntia.org/en/projects/audio-vision-sound-on-screen/](https://syntia.org/en/projects/audio-vision-sound-on-screen/). 

### Recording technology

Vibrato as a technique, whether employed in a vocal performance or with a
violin, helps mask pitch  discrepancies, which might explain why it was
considered “cheating.” As recordings became more commonplace in the early part
of the twentieth century, it was found that using a bit more vibrato, not only
could increase the volume of the instrument, especially when there was only one
mic to capture an orchestra or ensemble), but the pitch now could be smudged by
adding the wobble.

The mind of the listener “wants” to hear the correct pitch, so the brain “hears”
the right pitch among the myriad vaguesesses of pitch created by players using
vibrato. The mind fills in the blanks, as it does with the visual gaps between
video frames in a movie, in which a series of stills creates the impression of
seamless movement.

The sound in live venues is also never as good as it is on a record, but we
mentally fix the acoustic faults- maybe with the help of those visual cues- and
often we find that a live experience is more moving than a recording.

Recordings freeze music and allow it to be studied, but in a live situation, the
ear can psychoacoustically zoom in on a sound or isolate a section of players
and pick out a phrase or melody- the way we can pick out a conversation at a
noisy dinner table if we can see the person talking.

### Acoustic associations

A region of the brain seems to be devoted primarily to sonic memory, and that
includes not just ringtones, dog goals, and ambulance sirens, but also snippets
of songs, mainly recordings, that we’ve heard as well. These sonic fragments
function as nodes in a network of related memories, specific places and moments,
that stretch beyond their acoustic triggers.

A slew of musical associations bounce around in our heads, linking to recurring
memories and feelings that, after a while, facilitate the creation and
reinforcement of specific neural pathways. These pathways help us make sense of
those experiences.

### The New World

Recordings bring distant musical cultures in touch with one another, they also
have the effect of disseminating the work and performances of sound producers,
singers, orchestras, and performers and creatives within a culture. As it
happens to all of us at some point, hearing a new piece of music for the first
time often opens a door that you didn’t even know was there. It communicates to
us about how we feel and perceive our bodies- in a way that other art forms
can’t. It’s sometimes in the words, but just as often the content comes from the
combination of sounds, rhythms, and vocal textures that speaks to our emotions.

Music embodies the way people think and feel: we enter into new worlds and
though our perception of those worlds might not be 100 percent accurate,
encountering them can be completely transformative.

_David Byrne’s style and energy are as apparent on the page as on the stage –
Kathryn Schulz, New York Magazine_

### Paris, an African city

“Over the years I’d been to a number of Paris clubs to hear music with the late
Jean-Francois Bizot, who had a magazine called Actuel that I admired. We’d see
Cuban or African bands or singers, and we’d eat at African restaurants. The
African diaspora was turning Paris into a hub that featured some of the best
African music in the world- many of the best musicians had moved there, or spent
much of their time. I proposed that we record in Paris to take advantage of what
seemed to me like a special moment and to work with some of those musicians. Not
to pretend to be an African band, but to see if something new - a third thing-
could emerge. It helped that we already had basic parts and structures to play-
a minimal foundation, but one that could be built on.

We worked at Studio Davout, a former movie theater out on the Peripherique. The
room was immense, unlike most New York studios. As an ensemble, we were all
playing at the same time, and there was enough distance between us that we could
hear and see each other but still have some acoustic separation.

### New York, the Secret Latin City

I decided in 1988 that I would try to make a pan-Latin record, to dive into that
world using a batch of songs I’d written as a foundation. I’d gotten into the
habit of visiting Latin clubs and continued to immerse myself in the old
records- it was all part of the history of my city, New York, so why not partake
of it? I knew I wanted to include grooves drawn from a wide swath of South
America- a cumbia rhythm from Colombia and samba from Brazil, as well as the
classic son montuno and cha-cha grooves that formed the Afro-Cuban base of New
York salsa. Latin musicians generally tend to specialize in one or another of
these styles; salseros don’t usually play sambas, just like the blues-rock
guitarists don’t often play speed metal. But we recruited players from all
around the New York metropolitan area, where pretty much every kind of musician
from the New World could be found, and in this way we began the advance work.

### Playing well with others

Many of my songs were written without songwriting partners. Are they less good
than the ones where the job was split, or where a partner modified, added to, or
rejected my ideas, or I theirs? I can’t answer that, but certainly musical
partnerships have often led me to places I might not otherwise have gone.

In this system, one person’s response to another’s contribution could shift the
whole place in a radically different direction- harmonically, texturally, or
rhythmically. Pleasantly unexpected surprises would occur, but just as often
they could seem like rude and arrogant impositions that misused the significance
and integrity of the preexisting material. Is this disruption a risk worth
taking? Did the piece just get ruined, or did it really need to get radically
rethought in order to go somewhere new and exciting? You can’t be too precious
in this process. For us, this method resulted in music in which the authorship
was to some extent shared among a whole group of people. The musical bed was, in
these instances, very much collaborative.

Excerpts from David Byrne’s book, “How Music Works”.

### Notation and communication

When musicians play together and record, they come up with terms- real and
invented- to try to communicate musical nuance. Funkier, more legato, more holes
and spaces, less pretty, spiker, simpler, pushed hard, more laid-back- I’ve said
all of those things when trying to describe a musical direction or the feel I
was looking for. Some composers resort to metaphors and analogies. You could use
food, sex, texture, or visual metaphors; I’ve heard that Joni Mitchell described
the kind of playing she wanted by naming colors. So, interpreting a written
score, reading music notation, is itself a form of collaboration. The performer
is remaking and in some ways rewriting the piece every time he plays it.

To encourage this kind of collaboration, to make the interpretive aspect more
overt, some composers have written their pieces as graphic scores. This is a way
of granting a generous degree of freedom in the interpretation of their work,
while simultaneously suggesting and delimiting the organization, shape and
texture of their pieces across time. Below is the graphic score by the composer
Iannis Xenakis.

![](https://images.prismic.io/syntia/ZsY6RUaF0TcGJL7l_c12537e6ab47bca242d19824407d8e050fa81f08.jpg?auto=format,compress)

Source:
[](https://drawingcenter.org/exhibitions/iannis-xenakis-composer-architect-visionary)
[https://drawingcenter.org/exhibitions/iannis-xenakis-composer-architect-visionary](https://drawingcenter.org/exhibitions/iannis-xenakis-composer-architect-visionary)

This approach isn’t as crazy as it might seem. While these scores don’t specify
which notes to play, they do suggest higher or lower pitches as the lines wander
up and down, and they visually express how the players are to relate to one
another. This type of score views music as set of organizing principles rather
than a strict hierarchy- the latter viewpoint usually ends up with melody at the
top of the pile. It’s an alternative to the privileged position melody is
usually given- it’s about texture, patterns, and interrelationships.

Robert Farris Thompson, a professor of art at Yale, pointed out that once you
let yourself see things this way, lots of things become “musical scores” -
although they might never have been intended to be played. He argued that in a
lot of African weaving, one can sense a rhythm. The repetition in these fabrics
doesn’t consist of a simple looping of mirror images and patterns; rather,
modular parts recombine, shift position, and interact over and over with one
another, aligning in different ways over time, recombinant. They are scores for
a funky minimalist symphony. This musical metaphor implies a kind of
collaboration as well.

![](https://images.prismic.io/syntia/ZsY8ukaF0TcGJL_y_LivingTradition_AmericanCraftCouncil.jpeg?auto=format,compress)

Source:
[](https://www.metmuseum.org/exhibitions/listings/2008/african-textiles/photo-gallery)
[https://www.metmuseum.org/exhibitions/listings/2008/african-textiles/photo-gallery](https://www.metmuseum.org/exhibitions/listings/2008/african-textiles/photo-gallery)

These are musical breaks, fugues and stanzas, inversions and recapitulations
here. It’s not that crazy to believe that some part of vast African musical
sensibility was carried across the oceans and reconstructed using visual means-
that these fabrics functioned as a structural mnemonic aid.

If music can be regarded as an organizing principle- and in this case one that
places equal weight on melody, rhythm, texture, and harmony- then we start to
see metaphors everywhere we look. Musicians playing together find a kind of a
symbiotic relationship between one another and an interplay between, so that the
interlocking and interweaving create a sonic fabric.

### Emergent storytelling

Sometimes music and visuals work together so seamlessly that it’s hard to
imagine a theatrical work or a film without its score, and vice versa. Some film
and stage music evokes the whole story, the characters, and the visuals every
time we hear them. But where does it emerge from?

Sometimes sitting at a desk trying to force the lyrical context doesn’t work. At
those times I ask myself if my conscious mind might be thinking too much- and it
is exactly at this point that I most want and need surprises and weirdness from
the depths.

Some techniques help in that regard. For instance, I’ll carry a microrecorder
and go jogging, recording phrases that match the song’s meter as they occur to
me. When I’m driving a car, I can do the same thing. Sometimes just a verse, or
even a phrase or two, will resonate and be sufficient, and that’s enough to
unlock the idea. From there on, it becomes more like fill-in-the-blank,
conventional puzzle solving.

### You are the music, while the music lasts

The way we imagine what our senses do is affected by our cultural biases as well
as by the way our language limits our perception. What we refer to simply as the
sense of touch actually includes separate sensors for temperature, vibration,
texture and movement- each of which could have qualified as a separate sense.
The experience includes intuition, emotion, smell, touch and hearing. 

The UCLA study proposed that our appreciation and feeling for music is deeply
dependent on mirror neurons. When you watch, or even just hear, someone play an
instrument, the neurons associated with the muscles required to play that
instrument fire. Dr. Edward W. Large at Florida Atlantic University scanned the
brains of people with and without music experience as they listened to Chopin.
As you might guess, the mirror neuron system lit up in the musicians and
non-musicians who were tested. The UCLA group contends that all of our means of
communication- auditory, musician, linguistic, visual- have motor and muscular
activities at their root. By reading and intuiting the intentions behind those
motor activities, we connect with the underlying emotions- our physical and
emotional state are inseparable.

Mirror neurons are also predictive. We might sense the emotionally resonant rise
and fall of a melody, a repetition, a musical build, and we have expectations,
based on experience, about where those actions are leading- expectations that
will be confirmed or slightly redirected depending on the composer or performer.
When we observe an action, posture, gesture, or a facial expression, we have a
good idea, based on our past experience, what is coming next.

### Distribution

Here’s the traditional breakdown of what record companies used to do:

- Fund recording sessions

- Manufacture product

- Distribute product

- Market product

- Advance money for expenses (concert tours, videos, promotional events, hair
  and makeup)

- Advise and guide artists on their careers and recordings (managers are
  supposed to do this, but record companies do as well)

- Handle the accounting of all of the above and eventually funnel some of the
  leftover cash

But now an album can be made on the same laptop you use to check email. Digital
distribution is pretty close to being free in terms of costs in manufacturing-
with LPs and CDs there were base manufacturing costs, printing costs, shipping,
warehousing of stock and so on. It was essential to sell in volume, because
that’s how those costs got amortized. This meant that marginal music tended to
remain marginal because of economics and technology, rather than the quality of
the music. Due to the large percentage of each record sale kept, the record
companies often broke even way before the artists began to see their own shares
trickle in.

Performing is now viewed as a source of income. Where there used to be one
model, now there are six, ranging from the artists who put themselves entirely
in the hands of the label to the artists who do nearly everything themselves. At
one end of the spectrum is the 360°, or equity, deal, where every aspect of an
artist’s career is handled by producers, promoters, marketing people, lawyers,
accountants, and managers. The idea behind this model is that the artist can
achieve wide saturation and sales because they are being boosted by a system
working from every aspect of an artist's career.

At the other end of the scale is the self-distribution model, where the music is
self written, played, produced and marketed. Within the limits of what can be
afforded, the artists have complete and absolute creative control- not just
their music, but how it is sold.

Meanwhile, Spotify has given “advances” to US record labels in the area of $90
million- which encourages the labels to allow Spotify to have access to their
catalogues. In fact, Spotify is partly owned by some of these record labels, so
they’re giving advances to themselves and are not sharing them with the artists.

For emerging artists, self-distribution allows freedom but without much in the
way of resources or knowledge in distribution and market. Another source of
income for recording artists is licensing. The more a writer or band holds on to
their publishing- or even, when  possible, their master recording rights- the
more they will benefit from income sources. One licensing deal can provide more
income than a whole tour, and certainly more than royalties from sales through a
label.

In response to the decline of income for musicians is to source investments that
can have corporate support, live concerts, funding and licensing their work to
commercials. Not all of the alternatives are free or designed to fund or support
development of an ongoing career in music.

With all self respect performing artists must know their value, consider their
basic needs and career with regard to the others, and do not support the
institutions and companies with their work that promotes free labor and
exploitation.

The act of making music, clothes, art, or even food has a very different and
possibly more beneficial effect on us than simply consuming it. And yet for a
very long time, the attitude of the state toward teaching and funding the arts
has been in direct opposition to fostering creativity among the general
population. The way we are taught about music, and the way it’s socially and
economically positioned, affect whether it’s integrated (or not) into our lives,
and even what kind of music might come into existence in the future. Our
innovations and creations, after all, are what keep many seemingly unrelated
industries alive.

### The future

Education advisor Sir Ken Robinson points out that every educational system on
the planet was designed to meet the needs of nineteenth-century
industrialization. The idea, that Tom Ze implied, was to “manufacture” good
workers. This is largely because the current systems of public education were
never designed to develop everyone’s talents. They were intended to promote
certain types of ability in the interests of the industrial economies they
served.

Canadian composer and music teacher R. Murray Schafer originated the concept of
the soundscape, that can be thought of as our sonic surroundings and involves
the study of how that acoustic environment gives us a sense of place. A
soundscape that is out of whack, he says, makes us feel impotent. A soundscape
of a bureaucratic office building’s lobby tends to make you feel small and
insignificant. Schafer’s pedagogy begins with trying to create awareness, to
help students hear their sonic environment:

- What was the last sound you heard before I clapped my hands?

- What was the highest sound you heard in the past ten minutes? What was the
  loudest?

- How many airplanes have you heard today?

- What was the most interesting sound you heard this morning?

- Make a collection of disappearing or lost sounds, sounds that formed part of
  the sonic environment but can no longer be heard today.

Schafer writes, “For a child of five, art is life and life is art. Experience is
a kaleidoscopic and synesthetic experience, but once the child is in school they
get separated- art becomes art and life becomes life.” ”In their place,” he
suggests, “we substitute subjects that encourage sensitivity and expression.” He
says that the focus should shift to a general awareness of the world around us.

The habit of creative problem solving translates to any activity we find
ourselves engaged in, nurturing our skills and talent. The culture is a large
part of what it means to be human and we have adaptations that encourage us from
an early age to absorb or extract certain things from the culture around us. The
kind of built-in ability to perceive music in a similar way to innate ability to
clock relationships. The song from a loving mother to her child is more than
just the sound of a soft voice and soothing harmonic intervals- then speech
might be enough to calm a baby- but somehow the song seems to have come into
being, too.
